---
title: "A Sass Type Toolkit: Typesettings"
date: 2014-04-24
modified: null
tags:
description: Setting type using modular scale and maintaining vertical rhythm is not a new topic, at all. There are so many great tools and articles out there that help designers do these things. However I couldn’t find exactly what I was looking for.
layout: post.hbs
art: null
author:
  name: Ian Rose
---

**So I created [Typesettings](http://typesettings.io)**. I wanted a tool that only had one dependency and that dependency is Sass. There are some incredibly smart and effective tools out there. However I have experienced the pain of updating one Gem to have another Gem not work. So I wanted to remove that potential pain point for setting type.

Typesettings is also an experiment in trying to use more Sass functions with vanilla CSS. In a team environment I've seen mixins get used and abused. Where a designer uses a `@mixin` then writes additional styles to overwrite the styles generated by the mixin. Granted this is not the fault of the mixin author but I did think about how in the end the Sass is complied into vanilla CSS. So with Typesettings I'm playing around with trying to find a nice mix of the DRY principle and not abstracting too much. This is still a work in progress.

Lately the use of REMs as the go to unit for setting type I think is a little much. In recent projects I've had times where having the type set in REMs made things just as inflexible as if it were set in pixels. Jeremy Brunch has a [great post](http://j.eremy.net/confused-about-rem-and-em/) about when to use different units. So I wanted to see if I could figure out a toolkit that could use Ems and handle the math for the compounding effect. Thanks to Sass this is possible. I definitely looked at what [Compass](http://compass-style.org/reference/compass/typography/vertical_rhythm/) does for this concept.

<aside class="pullquote left">
  <p>“Setting type on a baseline is not complicated.”</p>
</aside>

Setting type on a baseline is not complicated. For me, setting **every** element on a page to land on the baseline is not as simple. Many posts explain how to setup vertical rhythm using the `line-height` value of the body type. Few explain how to set every element on the page on the baseline. The `line-height` is often a value around `24px` which does not provide the ability to fine-tune a UI. [Sassaparilla](http://sass.fffunction.co/) has the great idea of setting a base vertical unit to a much smaller value to allow designers to setup a layout where all elements land on a baseline. The base vertical unit is also used to set the body type `line-height` This concept can be found in Typesettings.

The one feature that I think is unique (my Google-fu may be weak) to Typesettings is the ability to have padding, margin, and font size set in Ems and have borders set in pixels while still maintaing vertical rhythm. Typesettings converts the pixel border width into Ems and subtracts that from the padding of the element. It then sets a border with a pixel value.

I plan on going into detail about the these and the remaining features of Typesettings in additional posts.
